baddest yen so I guess I'm gonna add
this video to my playlist of kind of
book naan reviews videos that are not
book reviews but are talking about books
that really influenced me and we're a
big part of my life and with all those
reviews have really made a point to not
go back and reread the source book it's
very much how I remember the books
involved today 10 years later 20 years
later which is quite different from
going back and you know rereading the
source and what you'd what you think
about it now so a couple days ago my
girlfriend asked me but I was really
surprised the question you asked me have
you ever read Aristotle now why did you
watch her that's the question I was
really surprised the question I feel
like I met you - every thought of all
the time oh yeah go you mentioned
conversation yeah yeah yeah
to me it just seemed like a preposterous
question because I feel like Aristotle
like I've I've recorded over 800 videos
on YouTube but I think maybe 20 of them
mention ever so maybe 30 I don't know
like quite quite a few times I've
mentioned it and I think I mentioned it
in in conversation it just seemed to me
preposterous one of your ex-girlfriends
took a class in which right it was a
quotation of Aristotle that was taken
out of context feminist Women's Studies
class right right right and discussing
the interpretation of what Aristotle
actually said about women and so on
right so look um you know in terms of
whatever stuff and you haven't read any
Aristotle so what I find that bizarre I
find that strange and for you so let's
just talk about Aristotle as a cultural
icon is one of things to talk about this
what does Aristotle mean to you
culturally as a white American from
Detroit no I mean I'm serious like you
know like you know me you know what is
George Washington mean to you look what
the cool who gives a [ __ ] about George
Washington is George Washington
symbolize anything positive to you but I
think Aristotle is someone who really
does have symbolic and cultural
resonance and wait yeah
I mean Aristotle is extraordinary
because he made the transition from
being a pagan philosopher to being a
Catholic philosopher historically that
is why he is so famous there was a brief
period when the Christian Church what we
now call the Catholic Church you know
suppressed and persecuted Aristotle and
then they kind of figured out that he
wasn't as anti-christian as they thought
he was they got to some of the passages
where he says about the nature of
divinity and God and Aristotle ended up
being rehabilitated as kind of one of
the few little bits and pieces of
antiquity of pre-christian philosophy
that could be embraced or at least
remixed reinterpreted and Andry
valorized in in Catholic Europe so
Aristotle in in a period when Europe you
know was was burning books was censoring
their whole Christian past when you know
philosophers like Lucretia soar what
have you or really you know persecuted
and so on what the things were regarded
as heresies and terrible and
what-have-you
that you know Aristotle made the
transition from being a pagan and a
heretic to being somewhat acceptable
within Catholic Europe so that's why his
fame grew as much as it did there's no
real reason I mean in a parallel
universe why not carni ADIZ why not you
know indeed why not Plato I think there
are a lot of reasons why not play
actually but why not some other
philosopher who's now slipped into
relative why not Democritus himself why
not
Puran ism what we now call skepticism
there were why not
cynicism for that matter you know sir
cynicism is now used that you know we
use it an english language a very
different way but there was a school of
philosophers called the cynics well
Aristotle was the guy who won the
lottery and made the transition from
pagan to Christian enough to being
acceptable within Christian discourse so
his fame grew and grew now in in my life
you know Aristotle does have some
special significance you know I'm not
someone who reads these books with the
delusion that they contain a message for
me nor that they contain a message for
my times so I do look at erä so first
and foremost as as a remnant of as a
fragment of a very alien culture that in
some ways I can never relate to so like
you know if I read a book
written in 17th century Africa I regard
that as really by the way 17th century
Portugal like sources have read from the
Portuguese Empire and stuff really alien
traditions and I'm just saying like even
relatively recent within Europe I feel
like I'm reading out you know an
artifact from a different culture that
in many ways I can't relate to at all
I remember even reading some Dutch
Empire sources from a couple centuries
ago and the way they open an end like a
letter you know your worship
you know what wow it's so alien you know
I am your humble of slave your worship
so as you just go back a couple
centuries within Western Europe and
really feel you're dealing with it with
a profoundly alien culture so this is
this is one thing I don't look at eros
Tolleson it's for me or Bella's message
for for my times however you know if you
come out of the political science
background if you care about politics
then you know I mean Aristotle is really
he's defined even some of the words we
now use in the English language for
politics this is also true of
metaphysics the word metaphysics itself
comes to the title of a work of of
Aristotle he had this definitive
significance on the development of
philosophy including social and
political philosophy so I guess there
was a sense when I was a young man of
kind of how can anyone take themselves
seriously if they haven't read Aristotle
now a lot of people say that about
Shakespeare I mentioned Shakespeare is
an example come on with Shakespeare it's
[ __ ] like you know I mean like you
don't need to read Shakespeare you know
believe me I do I'm gonna encourage my
own daughter to retake but I don't have
anything against Shakespeare when you
think about it what is there really of
such definitive significance in the
works of William Shakespeare I think
frankly nothing
have you read some of the sonnets of
Shakespeare you know the homoerotic
sonnets they arresting he does yes out
it's not okay you didn't read those okay
so you had she had a censored literary
class that's a big question how gay was
Shakespeare that's a there's a huge
stack of academic literature that by the
way I'm sorry and you know Gino is
sonnet about the dusky woman did
Shakespeare or sleep with black women
that's another
yeah yeah there's a lot about
Shakespeare sex life based on the base
of the sonnets by the way anyway another
topic another video but in what point is
you know by delving into Shakespeare by
pouring this kind of time attention well
you can even tell from my joking around
I have spent some time reading
Shakespeare but I don't think you get
anything out of it like that
so being serious about political science
being serious about politics being
serious about philosophy in some ways in
reading Aristotle you're gonna puncture
that illusion you're going to deflate
that illusion you're gonna move past
that that kind of aura that it's works
is taking on see the reality of what
they are but there's one important sense
in which you know I found something that
was you know kind of shocking and
tremendously important in Aristotle that
really changed my perspective on both
modern Western politics and the way
politics is taught and learned in
universities so in most editions of the
complete works of Aristotle there is one
very important work that is omitted and
that is Aristotle's constitution of
Athens so on the constitution of Athens
is a work attributed Aristotle that was
discovered quite late it was so it was
not influential in antiquity it wasn't
influenced when the Catholic period I've
already alluded to it's it's a modern
archaeological discovery feel like it's
a text that's re-entered that was that
was lost or largely unknown it was
unknown outside of Egypt I think it was
known within Egypt and then re-entered
the corpus of of Aristotle's writing the
view of democracy the philosophical view
of how democracy works at the source and
also the practical explanation of how
the democracy of Athens really works in
there and one of the things that came as
as a studying there are many things in
there that came to me is a stunning
revelation in contrast to the way
Aristotle is kind of packaged and
modernized for students within academia
but one of them is the word lot l OT
what aristotle supports is election by
lot he reveals and criticizes election
by a vote as anti-democratic and as
tending towards aristocracy the whole
philosophy of politics and democracy
that you get in other longer
donal like you know he has one book
simply called the politics and this kind
of thing more on politics everyone
translate the title you have to go back
and reexamine it realizing what's made
clear in the english translation of the
constitution of athens which is that
aristotle is a critic of what we now
call electoral philosophy what party
we now he is a critic of what we now
call electoral democracy what he
supports is election by lot lottery
electing people at random his model of
human equality and participation and
also his whole criticism of it's still
huge problem today of corruption and
special interests and consul conflict of
interest his way to overcome that is you
constitute a class of educated people
he's obviously not talking about
collecting every one of the society
Athens was a very unequal society there
were slaves and there were slave owners
but where you basically have a group of
people who are a group of men it's only
men who are qualified to hold public
office and then they are assigned their
particular offices in government by a
lot by lottery not not by election in
our sense at all and I remember reading
that and it was a stunning moment
because I realized the extent to which
all my professors have been lying to me
even my textbooks have been lying to me
the the significance of and a lot of
things Aristotle said that were kind of
confusing in the past because he doesn't
he's kind of confusing in terms of the
incas are only reading this anguish on
in greek he's kind of confusing
criticisms of corruption and democracy
how democracy doesn't doesn't work he
talks a lot about the way in which
democracy tends to slide into oligarchy
and from ego rap in Canada at the time I
couldn't really relate to that yeah well
no I mean for you to it's like okay why
did george w bush become president well
because before him George Bush Senior
was president why did George Bush Senior
become president well because he was the
head of the CIA why did he become head
of the CI because he was a millionaire
involved in oil rigs in the Caribbean
and those oil rigs in the Caribbean were
I mean it's it's pretty dark the role of
you know the extent to which democracy
becomes a kind of mask over oligarchy
that was a huge issue for me growing up
in Canada
to some extent we all feel and
realize so that aspect of Aristotle's
philosophy which I had understood in the
past but the English didn't quite make
sense unless oh it's because he's
dealing with a difficult to translate
contrast there's a contrast being two
types of elections election by vote and
election by lot so when I knew that that
was a turning point in my life in a lot
of ways and it mean it deepened for me
the sense that if I was gonna learn
anything at all I had to learn it as an
autodidact I had to learn it by
interrogating primary sources to the
greatest extent possible and you know
the most easily accessible source of
information whether those are kind of
encyclopedia articles or introductory
history textbooks those are almost
always in our culture the most dishonest
you know that you're better off getting
a fragmentary and incomplete view of
history by working from authentic
primary sources you know what I mean
which of course have their own type of
bias rather than getting someone's
overview of history and politics that
has gone ahead and read a bunch of
sources for you and smooth them out and
made generalizations about them because
underneath those generalizations I mean
to say that the devil is in the details
is is a in an understatement of course
this is what I would go on to a counter
encounter in Buddhism in First Nations
politics and so many things it's so easy
to give people a kind of reassuring
summary a summation of what a philosophy
is about what a political dispute is
about even what a civil war is about you
know what I mean you can watch a youtube
video right now about the the Spanish
Civil War 20th century war or about you
know the Seven Years War you know or the
French Revolution oh oh and I should say
that sorry for me that's even linked to
my break away from left-wing politics
from communism my parents were
communists I was very much raised to be
a communist but you know I had a book
that was literally on my bookshelf from
my earliest childhood about the history
of the Russian Revolution you know the
creation of communism in Russia and it
contains so many statements that were in
the same way true but misleading you
know the meaning you could say a lot
about Aristotle and his philosophy and
what do you say we just perspective
democracy you can see things that are
true but misleading were had to realize
that so much of what I knew whether it
was about Karl Marx or Western democracy
or ancient Greek was in this sense true
but misleading and that I had to
interrogate primary sources and I was
better off having incoherent little
fragments of information based on those
real sources rather than any kind of
synoptic analytical overview produced by
another by another scholar by another
author because the level of deception
was so high and indeed the level of self
deception on the part of those authors
was so offensive
[Music]
evolution